>> Funding for Frontline is
provided by:
The Park Foundation--
committed to raising public
awareness.
With major funding for News War
from the Richard and Rhoda
Goldman Foundation.
And additional funding from the
Nathan Cummings Foundation.
Frontline is made possible by
contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.
Thank you.
>> NARRATOR: Tonight on
Frontline...
>> The job of a reporter is to
be the curmudgeon who raises
questions that nobody else wants
to raise.
That's what the best reporters
try to do.
>> NARRATOR: Once upon a time,
they were thought of as heroes.
But today the entire news
industry is in crisis.
>> The public has a terrific
disdain for the press.
>> We have a press that is at
war with an administration while
our country is at war against
merciless enemies.
>> For 30 or more years, there
had been an assumption about the
government and the press, and
suddenly in the last couple of
years that's changed.
>> NARRATOR: In a four-part
special series, Frontline
reporter Lowell Bergman looks at
the challenges facing
journalists today...
>> Would you go to jail to
protect your source?
>> Absolutely.
>> NARRATOR: ...the war between
the White House and the press...
>> The President of the United
States saying, "If you publish
this story, you will have blood
on your hands."
>> NARRATOR: ...the explosion of
new and emerging media...
>> Do you ever feel like the
6:00 news just ain't cutting it
for you?
>> You don't see anybody between
20 and 30 getting their news
from the evening news.
You see them getting it online.
>> NARRATOR: ...and the economic
realities of today's news
business.
>> You have to make more every
year to keep the shareholders
happy.
>> NARRATOR: How did we get
here?
>> We're judging journalism by
the same standards that we apply
to entertainment.
That may be one of the greatest
tragedies in the history of
American journalism.
>> NARRATOR: And what is at
stake?
>> There is a dire need for
institutions that tell the
truth, that pursue the truth,
and that chase it at all cost.
>> NARRATOR: Tonight, part two
of News War, a Frontline special
series.
>> We're going to start today,
much to the chagrin of the
people across the street, with
the pledge of allegiance.
>> I pledge allegiance to the
flag of the United States of
America and to the republic for
which it stands, one nation,
under God, indivisible, with
liberty and justice for all.
( cheers )
>> NARRATOR: Early last July a
group of protestors gathered
outside the New York Times
office building in midtown
Manhattan.
>> It's no longer the New York
Times.
It's the Al Jazeera Times.
The Al Jazeera Times!
>> NARRATOR: They were
protesting the paper's
revelation that the government
was secretly monitoring the
worldwide money-transfer network
known as SWIFT to track
terrorist financing.
>> Traitor, traitor, traitor!
>> NARRATOR: Fallout from
the Times story had been roiling
through the media for weeks.
>> This is a US government
secret program in a time of war,
willfully exposed for no good
reason by the New York Times.
>> I think the New York Times
should start running ads and get
some terror members and have
them say, "I saved my sleeper
cell thanks to the New York
Times."
>> Pinch Sulzberger and Bill
Keller ought to be frog-marched
out of the New York Times
building.
>> It's time to stop the Times!
It's time to stop the Times!
>> Clearly when we talked about
the SWIFT story we anticipated
that they would come after us.
I don't know that we anticipated
they'd come out after us quite
as noisily as they did, but we
expected that it would be
controversial.
>> We're at war with a bunch of
people who want to hurt the
United States of America, and
for people to leak that program
and for a newspaper to publish
it does great harm to the United
States of America.
>> It may seem odd to ordinary
Americans that somebody like me
has the power to defy the
President of the United States.
>> If you want to figure out
what the terrorists are doing,
you try to follow their money.
And that's exactly what we're
doing.
And the fact that a newspaper
disclosed it makes it harder to
win this war on terror.
>> But, in fact, that's the way
the inventors of the country set
things up, because the
alternative was to let the
government be the final arbiter
of its own flow of information.
>> NARRATOR: It's the battle
over who controls that flow of
information which is at the
heart of the struggle between
the Bush administration and the
press.
>> You brought it up.
You said how do I react to a
bombing that took place
yesterday.
It's precisely what the enemy
understands is possible to do.
They're capable of blowing up
innocent life, so it ends up on
your TV show.
>> NARRATOR: Against the
backdrop of the War on Terror,
the press has clashed repeatedly
with an administration that had
arrived in Washington determined
to change the rules.
( "Hail to the Chief" playing )
>> There was a feeling early on
in this administration that the
previous administration due to,
you know, scandal after scandal
gave up a lot of executive
power.
And I think that this
administration said, "You know
what?
No way."
>> NARRATOR: Mark Corallo worked
in John Ashcroft's Justice
Department.
>> There was a definite feeling
that we have got to recapture
the authority that was lost.
We've got to bring this back
into balance.
And that's where it's gone.
>> NARRATOR: Ashcroft had been
among the first to signal a
break from the past when he sent
out a memo reversing his
predecessor's policy on
openness.
>> What Ashcroft said is that
the prior policy, which
encouraged disclosure of
information unless some
foreseeable harm would result,
was being overturned in favor of
withholding information whenever
there was a legal basis to do
so.
This administration has a track
record of resistance to
disclosure.
In the earliest days of the Bush
administration, Vice President
Cheney had his famous Energy
Task Force, in which people
said, "Well, we want to know
more about what's going on
here."
And the Vice President said,
"Absolutely not.
It would have a chilling effect
on the quality of the advice
that I receive if the names of
the people that I talk to were
publicly disclosed."
A few months later, President
Bush issued an executive order
tightening restrictions on
public access to records of past
presidents.
The papers of the Reagan
administration were supposed to
become public in 2001.
This executive order said, "Wait
a minute, those records are not
going to be automatically made
public."
The secrecy predated 9/11 and is
rooted in the President's own
personality and in his governing
philosophy.
>> NARRATOR: The President and
his team had also brought with
them new ideas about the press.
>> Good morning, thank you.
>> Every president complains
about the press.
>> Cheryl.
Welcome.
We have a couple of newcomers
today.
>> But what I think is different
about this administration from
previous administrations is that
the Bush administration does not
accept that the press has a
legitimate public interest role.
>> NARRATOR: Ken Auletta has
covered media for the New Yorker
magazine for over a decade.
>> They view us as a special
interest.
And so when I asked Andrew Card,
his then Chief of Staff, I said,
"Do you accept that the press
has a legitimate check and
balance function?"
He said, "Absolutely not."
He said, "Congress has a check
and balance function; the
judiciary does, but not the
press."
>> You know, I think Secretary
Card was right.
I mean, I think the true checks
and balances are the judiciary
and the Congress.
You know, the press is not
elected.
>> NARRATOR: Mark McKinnon is a
former top media advisor and
close confidante of the
President.
>> The press is going to make
its determinations.
But, you know, who's going to
judge which press outlet is the
proper check and balance?
>> INTERVIEWER: This
administration had a lot of
discipline in terms of the way
in which it controlled its
message.
>> Yep.
>> INTERVIEWER: But every
administration has said that at
the beginning.
>> Yep.
>> INTERVIEWER: This one really
was very successful keeping
people if you will, on message,
on... in line.
>> That's right.
>> INTERVIEWER: How?
>> You have a guy at the top who
knew... knows what he... knows
who he is and what he stands
for.
If we get off message, he lets
us know.
And we have a team of people
that work together a long time.
We know what works and we know
what doesn't.
>> I remember 2004, at one
point, people... you just stood
up and said, you know, "There's
no way for you to get
reelected."
>> Certainly the relationship
between this administration and
the media is not a good one.
And certainly we believe that
the secrecy has been excessive,
quite excessive.
And it... but at the same time,
you know, their job is to do
their job, and our job is to
find out what's going on.
>> NARRATOR: Leonard Downie is
the executive editor of the
Washington Post.
>> This always happens with the
administrations after they've
been around in Washington for a
while.
Personnel begins to change.
Schisms occur within the
administration itself.
Its control over the message
begins to fray.
We're finding out more and more
all the time.
>> NARRATOR: By 2005, with the
war on terror in its fourth
year, more secrets were
beginning to leak from the
government.
One of Downie's national
security reporters, Dana Priest,
was learning details about a top
secret CIA program.
>> Dana's very, very deeply
sourced throughout the military
and throughout the intelligence
services.
And a number of these sources
were concerned about some of the
policies that the administration
was carrying out in the war
against terrorism.
These are people who, as Dana
describes them, are very much,
you know, very strong proponents
of the war against terrorism.
They're active in the war
against terrorism.
But they're concerned that some
of these methods were
counterproductive.
So for these reasons they would
cooperate with her when she'd
ask questions about things that
added up to some of these
stories.
>> NARRATOR: The stories were
about a system of prisons being
run by the CIA, some of which,
Priest would learn, were housed
in countries in Eastern Europe.
>> The existence of the prisons
and the places that they're in
are illegal in the places where
they are.
>> INTERVIEWER: It wasn't just
detention in these democracies
in Eastern Europe, it was also
interrogations?
>> The whole reason for having
the detentions in the black
sites was so that the CIA could
interrogate the people in them,
and nobody else-- not the host
nation, nobody.
>> INTERVIEWER: Not the
Pentagon?
>> Not the Pentagon, not the...
>> INTERVIEWER: ...FBI.
>> Nobody, just the CIA
>> INTERVIEWER: Their little...
>> Their little prison system.
>> INTERVIEWER: At a certain
point, the administration knew
what you were doing...
>> Right.
>> INTERVIEWER: ...on these
detention facilities.
>> Right, I told them.
>> INTERVIEWER: You called them
up?
>> I called them up.
Whenever there's something that
the reporters obviously see as a
potentially sensitive piece of
information, we will... I will
tell them what it is before I
publish it and ask for a
comment, but also give them a
chance if they want to or if
they feel that it's necessary to
say, you know, that piece of
information would really be
damaging to whatever-- an
ongoing operation, people's
lives, things like that.
>> There came a time when very
senior officials in the
administration asked to talk to
me along with Dana and her
editors about their questions
about whether or not some of the
things she knows would, in their
minds, harm national security if
we published them.
>> INTERVIEWER: Who called you?
>> I can't tell you that,
because I agreed to ground rules
in which they... they would not
be named as people would ask to
talk to me.
They're senior officials of the
government, very senior
officials of the government.
>> NARRATOR: As the Bush
Administration met with the Post
about the CIA prisons story, it
was also having similar
discussions with another paper
over an even more explosive
story.
>> President Bush, soon after
9/11, had signed a secret
executive order allowing the NSA
to conduct wire taps on
Americans' international
communications, their emails and
phone calls, if the NSA thought
these communications might be
tied to terrorism or al-Qaeda.
>> NARRATOR: With his colleague
James Risen, New York Times
reporter Eric Lichtblau had been
reporting on this secret
eavesdropping story for over a
year.
>> There was a legal procedure
set in place that's been in
place for 30 years for them to
conduct this kind of
surveillance.
>> It was widely understood that
if the government wanted to
listen to your phone calls or
read your emails, and you're
within the United States, they
needed a court order to do that.
>> NARRATOR: The reporters had
uncovered that the President's
executive order had allowed the
NSA-- the National Security
Agency-- to wiretap without any
such court oversight.
>> What I tried to struggle with
in writing this story on the NSA
was how do we as a country
really face up to the bounds
between what is a realistic
fight against terrorism versus
the cost of that fight in terms
of giving up our civil
liberties?
>> INTERVIEWER: Are we
destroying the village in order
to save it?
>> Right.
>> NARRATOR: By December of
2005, the Times was ready to go
with the story, and, as it had
with the Washington Post, the
White House asked for a meeting.
>> The ground rules of the
meeting, which we agreed to,
were that it would be off the
record because the President
wanted to present us with what
he said were classified details
about the effectiveness of the
program that he thought would
persuade us not to publish the
article.
I'm obviously going to honor our
obligation not to talk about
anything classified.
But the basic fact that the
meeting took place, the White
House has already talked about.
>> NARRATOR: Keller arrived at
the White House with Arthur
Sulzberger, the Times'
publisher, and Philip Taubman,
then the paper's Washington
Bureau Chief.
>> We were escorted into the
Oval Office.
That's my first visit, probably
my last visit to the Bush Oval
Office.
The President said quite
forcefully, that this program
was something he regarded as
part of the crown jewels of our
national security and that if we
exposed it, we should feel
ourselves responsible if there
was another attack on the US.
I think what he said was, you
know, "When we were called up to
explain to Congress why there
was another attack, you should
be sitting aside... beside us at
the table."
>> INTERVIEWER: Did you and Mr.
Sulzberger and Phil Taubman,
look at each other?
Did you gulp?
>> Look, you take a warning like
that very seriously indeed.
I mean, it's the President of
the United States saying that if
you publish this story, you will
have blood on your hands.
>> The President said nothing
like that.
The President did stress the
importance of this program
remaining secret.
This has been one of the most
effective tools in preventing
attacks on our country.
It's one of the most vital tools
that we've had in our arsenal to
defend America.
And the President felt obligated
if he felt that strongly about
it that he ought to tell the
person who was in charge of that
paper how he felt.
>> INTERVIEWER: But the
reporters involved and the
editors involved say all they
reported on was the question of
the legality of the program, and
that the terrorists, if you
will, know we're listening.
>> Well, they don't know all the
aspects of how we're doing it.
And for you to get into a
conversation about whether it's
legal, there are strong
insinuations about how the
program works.
And the disclosure of such a
program is like putting up a big
billboard to the enemy saying,
"This is how they're defending
their country."
And we think it's wrong.
>> The President wrapped it up
by reiterating that he thought
what we were about to do was a
mistake.
>> INTERVIEWER: Would give aid
and comfort to our enemies?
>> Would give aid and comfort to
our enemies, yes.
>> INTERVIEWER: That was the
gist of what he said?
>> Uh-huh.
We walked down to the corner to
catch our taxis in various
directions.
And I said to the publisher that
I wanted to obviously sleep on
it and think about what we just
heard, but I hadn't... my first
impression was I hadn't heard
anything there that had changed
my mind, and he said he hadn't
either.
>> There are things that I know
that were reported as long ago
by our reporters as several
decades ago that we've never
published in the newspaper, and
I've never uttered a word about
because it's clear to me it
would be harmful to national
security.
But at the same time, many times
that claim is made by the
government simply because they
want to avoid embarrassment.
>> INTERVIEWER: We're at war.
The President says we're at war.
>> Yes, he does.
>> INTERVIEWER: So who are you
to decide what's in the interest
of the country, what's national
security and what isn't?
>> Well, decisions about whether
something would be harmful to
national security or not is just
another one of those many
decisions we make about what
we're going to publish or not
going to publish.
Under our constitutional system,
those decisions cannot be made
by the government.
That's... that's
unconstitutional, and it also
would be dangerous to our
democracy.
It has to be left to editors and
television producers to make
these decisions.
>> If our country is to survive
this wound, let us be more
honest in the pursuit of peace.
>> NARRATOR: The debate over the
right to publish state secrets
goes back to another era when an
unpopular war raged...
>> Never have so many of our
people manifested opposition to
this country's involvement in a
war.
>> ( screaming )
>> NARRATOR: ...and the
government and the press were at
odds.
>> We had an agenda we wanted to
implement.
And the principal impediment to
that objective in Vietnam was
the mass demonstrations, given
aid and comfort and support by
the liberal media.
They were standing on our
windpipe.
>> NARRATOR: In 1969, Patrick
Buchanan was a speechwriter in
the Nixon White House.
>> The battle between the White
House and the national media is
a battle over who controls the
national agenda.
>> NARRATOR: In 1971, the battle
moved to the front page of the
New York Times when the paper
began running a leaked copy of a
secret Defense Department study.
Known as the Pentagon Papers,
the report revealed the
deliberate deceptions that led
the country to war in Vietnam.
>> It came out on a Sunday and
on Monday we were doing well.
And then, I think it was a
Tuesday afternoon, I'd checked
in and said, "Is everything
okay?"
And my boss, who was opposed to
publication, said, "Well, you
better come on over."
>> NARRATOR: James Goodale was
General Counsel for the New York
Times and had urged the paper
to publish the secret documents.
>> So I ran out, hopped in a
cab, shot into the New York
Times, went up to the executive
floor, which is the 14th floor,
and I walked into a room where
there was a huge screaming match
going on.
The government had sent a
telegram to the New York Times,
saying stop publication or we're
going to sue you in court the
next day.
>> I thought that publishing the
Pentagon Papers was quasi-
treasonist in war time, yeah.
To me it was a clear effort to
sabotage the war effort.
A number of these newspapers,
you know, cheer us into war.
And then they... Americans go
into battle and they get killed
in great numbers, and then these
folks tend to undermine.
>> NARRATOR: In his telegram,
Nixon's Attorney General cited a
1917 law called the Espionage
Act, which forbids the
publication of national defense
secrets.
>> He said that the
publication-- the ongoing
publication-- by them of
portions of the so-called
Pentagon Papers violated the
Espionage Act.
>> INTERVIEWER: Classified
material.
>> Classified material relating
to the national defense, where
national security would be
gravely imperiled.
>> NARRATOR: Floyd Abrams was
hired by Goodale to help
represent the Times after the
paper's corporate counsel
refused to take the case.
>> They had been told by their
lawyers that they would likely
lose, and most of all, from some
sort of moral point of view,
that they were acting
unpatriotically in publishing
the Pentagon Papers.
>> So the issue was do we obey
the government or do we make the
government come after us?
And that was the subject of this
terrific argument.
>> NARRATOR: Goodale joined in
and then was called to the phone
to talk to the publisher, Arthur
"Punch" Sulzberger, who was on
vacation in Europe.
>> Punch said "Jim, what do you
think we ought to do?"
And I said, "I think you're
going to publish."
He said, "Well, what about"-- "I
think you should publish"--
"What about the criminal
liability?"
I said, "I think that's a...
that's a risk... I think that's
a risk you can... you can take,
and if they stop us, I think we
can win that, too."
He said, "Okay, go with it."
>> NARRATOR: As it had
threatened, the Nixon
administration went to court and
got an order barring the
newspaper from continuing to
publish.
The paper appealed the decision
and the case moved quickly
through the courts.
>> Constitutional law is an
interesting thing.
It reflects the politics of the
moment.
Vietnam war: terrific public
antipathy toward the
administration and a lot of
popular support for the New York
Times.
When I went into the courtroom,
people hissed, shouted, they
were crowded.
It was like the Scopes... Scopes
trial, and none in favor of the
government.
>> For two and a half weeks, two
constitutional principles have
clashed: the government's view
of our national security versus
the newspapers' view of their
freedom to print.
And the newspapers won.
>> NARRATOR: The Supreme Court
ruled in favor of the Times and
the Washington Post, which had
also published portions of the
Pentagon Papers.
>> Well, my reaction was very
simply one of delight and one of
"Now we'll go back to business
as normal, getting out the
Times."
>> NARRATOR: The Times and Post
resumed publishing the Pentagon
Papers the next day.
>> It was a very important case
to resist.
If they hadn't been willing to
really risk lots, things would
be very different, both legally
and almost culturally, in terms
of the relationship between the
press and the government.
>> Mr. Sulzberger, knowing what
you know now about what
happened, would you do this
again?
>> Yes, sir, but I'd time my
vacation to Europe slightly
differently.
( laughter )
>> We won a near absolute ban on
prior restraints, injunctions
against speech.
>> INTERVIEWER: That still
stands today?
>> That... that still stands.
I mean, if the government had
gone to court to try to prevent
publication of some of the
recent controversial pieces by
the Times, I believe we would
have won because of the Pentagon
Papers case.
But the overhanging question is,
all right, they can't stop you
in advance, can they put you in
jail?
Can they punish you after the
fact?
>> NARRATOR: Four years later
that's exactly what the Ford
White House wondered.
New York Times reporter Seymour
Hersh had exposed details of
highly classified Navy missions
being used to spy on the Soviet
Union.
Ford's Chief of Staff, Donald
Rumsfeld, and his young deputy,
Dick Cheney, began deliberating
on what to do.
In a handwritten memo obtained
by Frontline, Cheney asked what
action they should take "to
enforce the law which prohibits
such disclosure."
>> I was told about it at the
time.
I didn't think it was serious,
it was more serious.
>> INTERVIEWER: You were told?
>> I was told at the time,
somebody in Justice warned me
that they were... they were, you
know, they were looking at me.
He wanted people to go into my
house.
They called it my apartment, but
I had a house.
>> NARRATOR: In notes from a
meeting with the Attorney
General, they discussed
alternatives for action, from
getting a search warrant to go
after Hersh's papers to seeking
immediate indictments of the New
York Times and Hersh.
>> When Cheney and Rumsfeld were
looking at me, the Attorney
General said, "Get out of here."
The political cost of moving
against me or people-- I don't
mean that arrogantly, not
about-- moving against somebody
who's prominent in terms of
being a critic is too high.
>> NARRATOR: Prosecuting the
reporter, the Justice Department
warned, "would become a cause
celebre for the press."
>> You can't trample the
Constitution.
And if they do, I'm going to
scream and moan and be a hero,
you know, and give more trouble
than they would if they'd just
left me alone, which is the
thing they did in this case.
>> NARRATOR: In the end, no
action was taken against Hersh.
>> INTERVIEWER: This situation
today, 35 years later, it just
seems like deja vu all over
again.
I mean, the New York Times,
national security-related
stories, the government
reacting.
>> Right.
But there are some differences.
One difference is that the press
is not in as good stead with the
American public now as it was in
1971.
Nowadays it's not easy to find a
sort of full-throated supporter
of the press.
>> NARRATOR: Indeed, last year,
when the Times and Post
published their NSA and CIA
stories, the reaction was
venomous.
>> I can't tell you how upset I
am by this: the fact that an
entire CIA program is outed by
somebody that doesn't like that
program.
>> NARRATOR: Cable talk shows
lit up with condemnation of the
paper's stories.
>> It seems like once again the
anti-Bush New York Times wants
to create a conspiracy where
there is none.
>> NARRATOR: The Bush
administration also took to the
airwaves.
>> It is really a serious
matter, when we get the
disclosure of a program like
this, because, after all, what
we must do is protect from those
who are trying to hurt us.
>> One of the problems we have
as a government is our inability
to keep secrets.
>> We do think it was a fairly
egregious act.
It was a very, I'm sure, a
difficult decision for the New
York Times to make.
I think they made the wrong
decision, and it harmed the
national security interests of
our country.
>> It was a shameful act for
someone to disclose this very
important program in a time of
war.
>> My first reaction in reading
the NSA story was, "Boy, there's
an excruciating amount of detail
in here," not just about the
program's existence, but about
the actual mechanics of how it
works and what makes it work and
why it functions well in one
case and not in another case.
>> NARRATOR: John Miller has
been on both sides of the divide
between the press and
government.
>> ABC News has learned that the
FBI...
>> NARRATOR: As a reporter at
ABC News, he was one of the last
journalists to interview Osama
bin Laden.
>> We asked bin Laden if Khan
was one of his.
>> NARRATOR: He is now an
assistant director of the FBI.
>> INTERVIEWER: So you didn't
think it was a responsible
story?
>> The standard I use to weigh
things on is, "Is this going to
be a good story?"
Clearly the NSA was going to be
a good story.
"Is it going to hurt the
government's ability to keep
people safe?"
And, you know, that is where the
debate is in that story.
>> NARRATOR: To some in the
intelligence community, it was
the Times' follow-up NSA story
that caused the most concern.
>> INTERVIEWER: There was an
article that revealed that there
were switches in phone companies
in the United States...
>> Right.
>> INTERVIEWER: ...that handled
all of the traffic.
>> Right.
>> INTERVIEWER: And what I had
heard was people were very upset
about the second...
>> Of course.
Of course.
>> INTERVIEWER: ...much more so
than the first.
>> Of course.
Because the second arti... the
second of the two articles
revealed techniques that were
being used to monitor traffic.
Everyone's always talking about
connecting the dots.
These are the dots.
And the number of dots we have
to work with has increased
exponentially since 9/11 as a
result of programs like this.
You might get from one of these
programs nothing more than the
name of an individual.
You then go to other programs.
You go to a detainee.
You work the system.
And that's what you get from
these programs.
You get fragments, shards of
things that ultimately form a
picture.
And to the degree that
terrorists tighten up in their
transactions, their
communication and their
security, you will get fewer of
those things.
>> INTERVIEWER: The follow-up
story in which The New York
Times publishes that the way in
which this eavesdropping is
being done is a data-mining
operation going on through
access to the switches that
telecommunications companies
have here in the United States.
That's something that, while it
wasn't classified, is something
that terrorists were not aware
of.
>> Well, I don't know whether
terrorists were aware of that or
not.
I... I... I think, you know,
my... my hunch is that
terrorists tend to assume
extraordinary powers, including
extraordinary technological
prowess on the part of the
Americans.
And I think they tend to assume
that the American government
uses that power in any way it
can.
>> NARRATOR: But the leadership
of the intelligence community
doesn't agree.
>> The consequences of these
leaks... and happy to have your
question to respond, and I'm
sorry to tell you that the
damage has been very severe to
our capabilities to carry out
our mission.
>> Leaking is a serious issue.
To see the frustration and the
outrage of people expressed
after certain things are leaked
which have severely damaged
operations or collection efforts
or put sources in jeopardy or in
danger, it has been very, very
serious over the years.
>> You go into a highly
confidential briefing on a
classified level, and a few
hours later or the next morning,
the phone rings and somebody
reads it all back to you and
maybe a little more than that.
And you hang up the phone and
say, "How did this get out?
Who takes this oath so casually
that they hand this stuff out?"
>> The people and the sources of
information that Eric Lichtblau
and I got for our story were
people who, in some cases, were
tortured by their knowledge of
this information.
They felt compelled to tell this
information, to make the public
aware of it because they
believed that it was either
unconstitutional or illegal, and
I think that they were classic
whistleblowers.
>> INTERVIEWER: You know,
there's a leak investigation
going on.
They're collecting the names of
reporters who have talked to
officials who had access to this
program.
There's apparently over a score
of agents working out of the
Washington field office.
Is it drying up your sources?
>> Well, I'd rather not get into
that in any detail.
I can just say that, you know,
continuing to report and work.
>> INTERVIEWER: You got
interviewed, right?
>> Yes.
If you were briefed into a
certain program that was leaked,
then there's a possibility that
you could be the leaker.
>> INTERVIEWER: Have they
interviewed you?
>> I've been interviewed.
>> INTERVIEWER: What did they
ask you?
>> They just, you know, they
just wanted to know why these
kinds of leaks happen.
>> INTERVIEWER: Today I talked
with a source of mine, who said
he just got polygraphed.
>>
Yeah, that's going on all around
town.
They're investigations of
sources going on all around
town.
And it's very, very worrying.
It's not good.
It's not good for the free flow
of information to the public,
and it's not good to criminalize
sources and reporters who are
merely engaged in trying to keep
the American public properly
informed.
>> NARRATOR: So far none of the
reporters involved in these
national security stories have
been asked to reveal their
sources.
>> On the external side, I've
called in the FBI.
>> NARRATOR: But the threat
remains.
>> It is my aim and it is my
hope that we will witness a
grand jury investigation with
reporters present being asked to
reveal who is leaking this
information.
I believe the safety of this
nation and the people of this
country deserve nothing less,
and I thank you for your
question.
>> I thank you, Mr. Director.
>> I don't think anybody,
special prosecutor, FBI,
Department of Justice, really
relishes the idea of using a
grand jury or, or a subpoena to
go and have a reporter talk.
But I think it also goes to the
issue that these are serious
matters at times and that
decisions have to be made about
whether or not the need to
protect sources, methods,
operations, intelligence
gathering for the country is...
is paramount.
>> Prosecute the Times!
Prosecute the Times!
>> NARRATOR: In June 2006, after
the New York Times published its
SWIFT banking story, the
rhetoric grew more heated still.
>> I say, that some anti-Bush
media in America is putting us
all in danger by exposing,
criticizing and undermining just
about everything the
administration does on the war
on terror.
>> There can be no excuse for
anyone entrusted with vital
intelligence to leak it, and no
excuse for any newspaper to
print it.
>> I don't mean to be too
cynical about the motivations
of, you know, the President and
the Attorney General, but some
of it clearly is political.
I mean, it's not an accident
that a certain number of these
speeches decrying The New York
Times happen to be at the
microphones of Republican fund
raising events.
>> Some in the press, in
particular, the New York Times,
have made the job of defending
against further terrorist
attacks more difficult by
insisting on publishing detailed
information about vital national
security programs.
>> The New York Times is red
meat to a certain slice of the
conservative base.
>> No one elected the New York
Times to do anything, and the
New York Times is putting its
own arrogant, elitist, left-wing
agenda before the interests of
the American people.
>> NARRATOR: But in the days
following the Times' banking
story, Representative Peter King
went beyond mere rhetoric.
He wrote a letter to the
Attorney General, formally
requesting that the Times be
investigated for possible
criminal prosecution under the
Espionage Act-- the same law the
Nixon administration had used in
trying to prevent the
publication of the Pentagon
Papers.
>> This week, Attorney General
Alberto Gonzales.
>> NARRATOR: A month earlier,
Attorney General Gonzales had
spoken to the issue of
prosecuting journalists.
>> So you believe journalists
can be prosecuted for publishing
classified information?
>> Well, again, George, it
depends on the circumstances.
There are some statutes on the
books, which if you read the
language carefully, would seem
to indicate that that is a
possibility.
>> When he says there are laws
on the books, well people who
know, know there are not many
laws there other than the
Espionage Act.
So, he effectively is saying the
Espionage Act can be used.
>> INTERVIEWER: You know what
the Espionage Act is, right?
>> I'm not a lawyer, but I... I
know what it is.
>> INTERVIEWER: The New York
Times was threatened 35 years
ago.
>> Mm-mm.
>> INTERVIEWER: You think
they're more serious this time?
>> Oh, I don't know.
I don't... I don't know how
serious they are about the
Espionage Act.
Honestly, I don't.
But my instinct is that at this
point they're largely
brandishing the Espionage Act in
hopes that that will make us
nervous and intimidate us.
Maybe intimidate some of our
sources.
>> INTERVIEWER: Should they be
prosecuted?
>> I'm not going to get into
prosecutorial decisions made by
the Justice Department.
I'm not a lawyer nor would I try
to be.
But it's an important debate for
the country to have, for the
media and government officials
and others to have who watch
this issue closely because we
are in a new paradigm where the
enemy of our country... enemies
of our country use the very,
technology and comforts of our
lifestyle against us.
And this is a healthy debate for
our country.
>> INTERVIEWER: There used to
be, if you will, a de facto
truce between reporters and for
instance, the Justice
Department...
>> Mm-hmm.
>> INTERVIEWER: ...around
confidential sources,
particularly in Washington about
being able to talk without fear
of retribution.
That's all broken down, hasn't
it?
>> It, it has all broken down,
little by little, because I
think at first, when even the,
the Valerie Plame leak
investigation, I think we still,
we understood that the ground
was shifting, but didn't
really... couldn't really judge
how much.
But as time marches on and
they're now potentially looking
at the Espionage Act to use
against people who gather
information rather than people
who give information, the
various leak investigations, and
the effort by the administration
to intimidate, I really do
think, the major media into just
leaving this area.
>> For 30 or more years, there
had been a certain assumption
about the government and the
press, and suddenly in the last
couple of years, that's changed.
The government has been much
more aggressive in going after
the press.
>> NARRATOR: Phil Bronstein is
the editor of the San Francisco
Chronicle.
Two of his reporters have
recently found themselves in the
news...
>> A showdown.
Lawyers representing two
reporters who won't reveal their
sources...
>> NARRATOR: ...and in legal
jeopardy.
>> We've said that we're not
going to betray the sources, and
we mean that.
>> NARRATOR: But this time the
subject is not the war on
terror; it's baseball.
In 2003, authorities raided a
sports nutrition lab called
BALCO, which was suspected of
distributing steroids to
athletes.
>> When you went to the web site
for BALCO, you saw all these
famous athletes that were part
of the company, or that were at
least doing business with the
company.
Barry Bonds was most prominent,
but Marion Jones, Tim
Montgomery, Bill Romanowski...
>> NARRATOR: Mark Fainaru-Wada
and Lance Williams reported on
the BALCO investigation for the
Chronicle as some of the
biggest names in sports began
testifying.
>> Very early on, Mark and I
heard that Bonds had used
steroids, that that was at the
heart of the investigation.
I assumed that that would all
come out when indictments were
issued.
>> Good afternoon.
>> NARRATOR: But it did not.
>> After an 18-month
investigation...
>> NARRATOR: The indictments did
not name any athletes.
>> ...to dozens of athletes.
>> NARRATOR: But by the end of
2004, the Chronicle had the
names.
>> One of baseball's biggest
stars reportedly admits to
taking banned, illegal
substances.
>> NARRATOR: A confidential
source had leaked the athletes'
grand jury testimony to the
reporters.
>> There's new information
tonight about San Francisco
Giants' slugger Barry Bonds.
>> NARRATOR: The stories
dominated the news.
Bonds had said he used BALCO
products, but never thought they
were steroids.
And Yankees slugger Jason Giambi
had admitted he used steroids.
>> We have a very distinguished
panel here.
>> NARRATOR: In the wake of the
Chronicle reports, Congress
investigated steroid use in
baseball.
>> The final award is the Edgar
A. Poe award.
>> NARRATOR: The reporters were
honored for their work at a
White House Correspondents
dinner.
>> We met the President in 2005.
He knew who we were and he knew
the stories.
You know, he's a former baseball
owner.
And he said, "You've done a
service."
>> NARRATOR: But not everyone in
the government was pleased with
the Chronicle's reporting.
>> We heard from the government
almost immediately upon
publishing our first story that
had grand jury testimony in it.
>> INTERVIEWER: What did they
say to you?
>> Oh, they said, "We understand
you have this information and
we'd like it back and we'd like
to know how you got it."
>> The government wanted to know
who our sources were.
They wanted all the related
information.
They wanted the packaging it
came in, and so forth.
Anything that would identify the
sources.
>> We, you know, we thought...
talked about it, all of us, and
of course, you know,
respectfully declined.
>> I respect the court system,
and I'll, you know, comply with
their wishes in every way
possible, but I am being asked
to-- not asked, told to-- betray
not only sources, but ideals
that I've held for 30 years as a
reporter.
And I'm also being asked to give
up my career because-- don't kid
yourself-- if they bully me into
betraying my sources, I can't
work anymore.
>> I think it's an interesting
notion in journalism that the
professional ethics and
standards require them to
violate the law.
>> NARRATOR: Randall Eliason is
a former federal prosecutor who
has studied the legal standing
of the privilege that reporters
assert to protect their sources.
>> No one has a right to decide
themselves what the law
requires.
I know journalists feel very
strongly that they need this
privilege in order to do their
jobs.
Congress hasn't agreed and the
Supreme Court hasn't agreed.
And so journalists have no more
right than any other witness to
say, "I'm just not going to
testify, no matter what you
say."
>> NARRATOR: With the
journalists refusing to
cooperate, last May the Justice
Department authorized subpoenas
to the Chronicle and its two
reporters, requiring that they
reveal the source of the leaked
grand jury testimony.
>> The Justice Department was
way out of line here.
This was an abuse of power.
>> NARRATOR: Mark Corallo, who
was involved in approving media
subpoenas under Attorney General
Ashcroft, filed an affidavit in
support of the reporters.
>> The government just did not
meet the standards set by their
own guidelines.
The guidelines are very clear: a
media subpoena should only be
sought when all other avenues of
investigation have been
foreclosed and only in exigent
circumstances.
And exigent circumstances were
explained to me to be grave
national security matters...
>> INTERVIEWER: Emergencies.
>> Yeah, emergencies.
>> INTERVIEWER: Life and death.
>> Life and death.
>> INTERVIEWER: What's the
problem here?
Your successor is not a baseball
fan?
>> I don't know.
You know, I don't know what's
happened here.
It seems that there has been a
policy shift.
It seems that, you know, what...
the way we operated under
Attorney General Ashcroft, where
we were absolutely committed to
not issuing one of these
subpoenas.
That seems to have changed.
>> You know, Mr. Corallo is no
longer at the Justice
Department.
And so, I think he's not aware
of... of all the facts and...
and you know, perhaps
surrounding these cases.
>> NARRATOR: Tasia Scolinos is
Mark Corallo's successor at the
Justice Department and helped
review the media subpoenas in
the BALCO case.
>> NARRATOR: There's no legal
requirement that the department
put special guidelines in place
when it comes to subpoenaing
members of the media.
Those are self-imposed
guidelines.
We feel that we have a very
serious obligation on behalf of
the taxpayers to prosecute cases
to the fullest extent of the
law.
>> INTERVIEWER: What's the
national security or exigent
circumstances in a case where
the President of the United
States has commended the
reporting?
>> Well, I mean, if you notice,
the guidelines... the guidelines
don't specifically say it has to
be a national security case.
>> INTERVIEWER: Understood.
>> The guidelines, I believe,
say that there needs to be
exigent... exigent
circumstances.
And that can take a lot of
different forms.
>> NARRATOR: The reporters
fought the subpoenas through the
courts, facing up to 18 months
in jail if they lost.
>> You know, we aren't choosing
prison here, by any means.
We feel the choice has been made
by the prosecutors and their
demands are just impossible.
>> INTERVIEWER: The
administration has a discretion,
through the Justice Department,
whether or not to bring certain
cases.
And I guess in this particular
case, the question is what's the
rationale?
You're going to shut down
reporting on something which
everyone says has been to the
interests of our public health
and to our youth who are
involved in sports.
>> Well, I think that's
subjective, to say that it would
shut down.
These are tough calls.
We put very seasoned and
experienced prosecutors in these
US attorney positions, to make
the tough calls.
But ultimately that's why
there's the checks and balances
of a court system.
The courts will... will
ultimately vet that out.
>> INTERVIEWER: So we cannot
expect the administration to
back down on that case, to back
off?
>> I speak only for the...
personally for the President.
We would not in... interject
from the White House into a
criminal prosecution.
The US attorneys involved in
this have broad discretion to
use... to pursue these cases as
they see fit.
>> INTERVIEWER: You're ready to
go to prison?
>> Well, "ready" is a perhaps
not the appropriate word.
But I... prepared, I guess,
although I don't even know if
I'm prepared.
Well, we're... if we have to go
to prison for this thing, then
that's, I guess, what's going to
happen.
I don't say that lightly at all.
Neither of us want to go to
jail.
But it's not an option for us to
provide information about
confidential sources.
>> NARRATOR: But in the end, the
reporters did not have to do
either.
In an unexpected twist, just
last week a BALCO lawyer
admitted to leaking the grand
jury testimony.
The government has agreed to
abandon its effort to put the
two reporters in prison.
But 30 miles east of San
Francisco, a reporter has gone
to jail.
Last fall, freelance journalist
and blogger Josh Wolf turned
himself in to the Federal
Correctional Institution in
Dublin, California.
>> Stay strong, man.
>> Here were some of my
supporters.
We all drove out to wish me off,
I suppose.
>> NARRATOR: Wolf was jailed for
refusing to testify in front of
a grand jury and to turn over
video footage that the FBI had
demanded.
No cameras have been allowed to
film with Wolf while he's been
in jail, but Frontline sat down
with him days before his
imprisonment.
>> INTERVIEWER: How did you
first find out that the FBI was
interested in what you may have
shot?
>> I was sitting in my room on
the phone with my mother and
hear the doorbell ring.
Come to get the door and there's
a guy in Bermuda shorts and
maybe like a Hawaiian button
down shirt and one of those
accordion briefcase things.
And my first thought was, like,
this has to be a reporter.
He was like, "Are you Josh?"
"Yeah."
"Can I talk to you?"
"Sure."
At this point he flashes the FBI
badge just like in the movies.
Opens it up and you're like,
"Oh."
>> NARRATOR: It's outtakes of
this video that the FBI wants.
It's of an anarchist protest in
San Francisco.
Wolf shot it and posted portions
of it on his blog, which covers
political protests.
>> INTERVIEWER: What was the
protest about and what were you
doing there?
>> The protest was facilitated
by a group called Anarchist
Action in solidarity with those
that were marching in
Gleneagles, Scotland, against
the G8 Summit that was going on
at the time.
( chanting )
>> NARRATOR: As Wolf filmed, the
demonstration grew violent.
>> This is an unpermitted march.
Get out of the street.
You are creating a public safety
hazard, get out of the street.
>> NARRATOR: A police officer
was seriously injured, and the
police would later claim that
some of the protestors tried to
set a police car on fire.
Wolf has made part of his
footage available to local news
and to Frontline.
But it's footage that he has not
released that the FBI wanted,
claiming that his tape could
reveal who allegedly tried to
burn the police car.
>> My concern is that this isn't
about the SFPD police car at
all.
I feel that if I were to open
the flood gates by providing
them a tape to prove that this
subject isn't on it, that I
would then be subject to
questions of, "Who is this
person?
Who is this person?
Who is this person?"
And basically, at that point,
all those people would be
subpoenaed.
And it'd be a never-ending witch
hunt to try to make a database
of civil dissent and people
engaged in... civil dissidence
and people engaged in civil
dissent.
>> It's not really his decision
as to what's important and what
isn't in a federal grand jury
investigation.
We don't really know what
exactly the government is
looking at in this case.
And unless you're involved in
the actual grand jury
investigation, you can't know.
So whether there's some broader
set of allegations that's being
investigated or some broader
kind of conspiracy, only people
involved in the actual
investigation know that.
>> If I were to give those tapes
to them, then I stop being an
independent journalist and
become, as some of the briefs
say, a de facto investigator for
the government.
There was a trust established
between people involved in the
organization that I was covering
and myself into the fact that
what I chose to release was what
I chose to release, and that I
wasn't an investigator for the
state turning over piles of tape
for fishing expeditions.
>> NARRATOR: Wolf has already
been in jail for six months.
The judge sentenced him to
remain in custody for the
duration of the grand jury term,
which is due to expire this
July.
He has already served longer for
defying a court order than any
journalist in American history.
>> We'll take you live now to
the Justice Department as
Attorney General Alberto
Gonzales briefs reporters on
terror-related indictments...
>> Iraqi leaders reportedly
agreed to develop a
timetable...
>> The President strongly
defends the detention and
questioning of terror subjects
by the CIA and he urges
Congress to grant him legal
authority to try suspects...
>> NARRATOR: The debate around
the national security programs
revealed by the Times and Post
has continued.
>> It was possibly the worst-
kept secret around, but today
President Bush finally
admitted it was true...
>> NARRATOR: Last September, the
Post's CIA prisons story was
back in the news...
>> The President insisted
techniques used on the
detainees...
>> NARRATOR: ...when the
President confirmed the
detention sites for the first
time.
>> This program has helped us to
take potential mass murderers
off the streets before they were
able to kill.
>> The media has a hugely
important role during this time
to bring out the things that are
worth debating.
And I think one of the reasons
the government's reacted in the
way that it has is that it's not
allowed that to happen.
>> The feds are trying to kill a
lawsuit over the NSA program to
wiretap without warrants.
>> NARRATOR: The NSA
eavesdropping story has
continued as well.
In August 2006, a federal judge
ruled that the program was
unconstitutional and the Bush
administration is appealing that
decision.
But last month, the
administration agreed to put the
program under court oversight.
>> The only thing we're saying
is this is something the
American people should know
about.
They then can decide whether
it's something they want to
continue or not.
That's our role.
Our role is not to say to the
American... to the government,
"Don't do this."
Our role is, "This is happening,
you decide."
>> Who do you want or trust to
protect you against terrorists?
The Bush administration or the
committed left media backed by
anonymous leaks?
>> There's merit in the United
States deciding at this point
where does it want to be on this
spectrum from security to
privacy.
At the end of this whole debate,
perhaps we will know better as a
country where we want to be.
>> INTERVIEWER: So you are
saying that there is some public
interest benefit that has taken
place despite the fact that you
would have stopped these leaks
if you could have.
>> There's some public interest
benefit that's taken place, but
the counter-terrorism effort has
also been set back.
Life isn't simple.
>> INTERVIEWER: Not in a
democracy.
>> Not in a democracy.
>> This report continues on
Frontline's web site...
>> One nation under God...
>> ...where you can watch the
full program again online,
access a database of dozens of
interviews with journalists,
editors and scholars, read
about the rights and
responsibilities of the
press...
>> Our job is to find out what's
going on.
>> ...and what the Plame case
revealed about Washington's
culture of reporting.
>> We understood that the
shifting, but couldn't really
judge how much.
Then join the discussion at
pbs.org.
>> Funding for Frontline is
provided by:
The Park Foundation--
committed to raising public
awareness.
With major funding for News War
from the Richard and Rhoda
Goldman Foundation.
And additional funding from the
Nathan Cummings Foundation.
Frontline is made possible by
contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.